Now, here's the thing. Most of the best
things that happened in my life came
from something bad. So, I've injured
myself before. So, years ago, I injured
my quadriceps.
[Music]
70 120 170 220. And then we go. So, I'll
do four feel sets and then I'll do one
top set of two on 270.
[Music]
[Applause]
Come on.
[Music]
We're back, baby. Well, kind of uh back
to low bar squats at the very least.
This is uh week three after my quad tear
and I'm starting my deadlifts session
with my squat rehabilitation. So, this
is the first week back of low bar
squatting. And last week I did 140 kg
for five reps high bar and I felt the
pain on my quadriceps. So I backed off
and only did two sets.
I wanted to do three sets of five two
times a week. And I was only able to do
two sets of five because that's that
second set of 140 for five that hurt my
quad. And when it comes to
rehabilitating muscle tears, my biggest
rule is don't train through pain. So
anyhow, I backed off. It's feeling okay.
And I've decided to go back to low bar
squats, which is actually a little bit
less demanding for the quadriceps. So,
uh, I did high bar squats because I
wanted to target. It's harder on the
muscle because it's forcing me to use
the exact muscle that I want to recover.
But now, as I want to bring back my
heavier loads, I'm going to go to low
bar and keep working forwards and try to
keep doing it painfree. But either way,
I'm not ready to go for a big heavy
squat session yet. So, I'm continuing to
use it as my warm-ups, but it's the
warm-ups for deadlifts. Now, here's the
thing. Most of the best things that
happened in my life came from something
bad. So, I've injured myself before. So,
years ago, I injured my quadriceps, and
that's when I took my bench press from,
you know, 180 kg to 200 kg in a very
short time. I did bench press
specialization because I was spending
less time on my squats. And I've got a
lot of stories that I can say where, you
know, like I lost my job and it forced
me to open my gym and lots of other
instances that are very similar. So
that's how I'm going to look at this. So
since I've backed off my squats, which
has been 3 weeks, my chest was hurting.
My shoulders come into my bench press
session because heavy squats hurts my
shoulders because I have pretty shitty
mobility. And I know what you're going
to say, why don't you do mobility work,
okay? Because I'm lazy. But anyway, I'm
doing a little bit more of it. But
either way, um I stopped my bench press
work, my heavy bench pressing, because
everything was just hurting and I
thought I I just can't hit the numbers
that I wanted to hit. So, the planned uh
bench press weight was 200 kg for for
two reps. And I came into the session
just thinking I don't have that today.
My upper body is too sore because of the
squats. Anyhow, backed off squats for 3
weeks. Uh came in the other day and I
did a bench press and I did 200 kg for
two without pain and it was comfortable
and it looked like I had a third rep.
And it's like, oh, why do I feel so
strong here? Well, it's because my
squats um have been pulled back a little
bit. But the next thing, the biggest
thing that I've been neglecting in my
entire career is my deadlifts. And the
reason why I do that is because
squatting and deadlifting pretty much
they interfere with each other the most.
It's very similar muscle groups. And a
lot of the times if you have a big squat
session, your deadlifts um can can
suffer from the fatigue from the squats.
So you won't be able to perform both at
a high level at the same time. And a lot
of people favor the deadlift because
typically they have a stronger deadlift
than their squat. So big deadlifters
typically say, "Ah, squats are always
hard. Sometimes it's there, sometimes
it's not. But I can always deadlift. Now
I'm the opposite. I used to be in a
position where it's like every squat
session I'd come in, put anything on my
back, and it's just strong. I just know
how to do it. But then when I come into
my deadlifts, it's always hard. So now
that my squats are secondary um and not
heavy, now I'm able to step on the
accelerator a little bit with my
deadlifts, which is a much uh needed
lift for me. my deadlift. I did 310
kilograms the other day um as a one rep
max and now I'm up to my new phase. So
my new phase is paused deficit
deadlifts. Last week I started on 260
for two um and today the goal is to beat
that. So there's a few logical
progressions. One of them is 265. Uh the
other one is 2 270. Um and I think 270
is a nicer number than 265. So um that's
what I'm going to be doing today. So
this is my squat warmup. Um, I'm going
to do my first set of five on 150
kilograms. If it's easy or if it should
be easy, but if it's painf free, I'm
going to slightly increase and slightly
increase. Uh, and I'm going to do three
sets of five. That's my warmup. And then
we're going to do the deadlifts. So, um,
let's get into it. Notice that the belt
is on, but it's not clipped up. Okay.
So, I'm just It's kind of there a little
bit.
So far so good. I know it's very light,
but I felt zero on the quadricep. Uh,
and hopefully it stays that way.
Not sick.
You know, it is winter. Um, and I've
noticed that I I do that a lot. Clear my
throat. But I don't feel sick. I feel
good.
no pain.
Very comfortable.
So, it's also like going from low bar to
high bar, sorry, high bar, which is
harder technique. High bar is a harder
technique for a number of reasons.
Um,
one having the barbell further away from
your hips. So the closer to your hips
you bring the bar, the stronger it is.
So that's the axis of rotation is the
hip joint. So the strongest squat is if
I had a barbell exactly on my back here.
So think of a belt squat. You'll be able
to belt squat way more than a high bar
squat because the load is being placed
closer. So further down towards the axis
of rotation, which is the hip joint. But
also when you do a low bar squat to
balance the bar on your back, it forces
you to lean forward and use your hips
more. When you're balancing on your
upper traps, it's more upright position.
I'm exaggerating, of course, with my
heels up. More upright position. So
that's less hips and more quads. The
quads are not as strong as the hips. So
that's two reasons why a low bar squat
is stronger than a high bar squat. So I
did 140 for five last week, high bar,
and it was easy.
But now I'm switching to low bar. It
should be way easier and less of the
muscle that I've actually injured.
No pain.
This is something that I've noticed with
eye position and teaching people how to
squat. The typical cue that I like to
give is to look straight ahead because
the body follows the eyes. That's the
cue that I learned from my mentor Ernie
Liybridge Senior who's the father and
coach of Eric Liybridge who can squat
480 kg uh best in the world. And so you
know the the idea of it is looking
straight ahead. It's not about neck
position or neutral spine or anything.
It's about proprioception. When you have
a really really heavy weight on your
back, um when you look down, it can
force your torso to tip down.
And at those loads, you don't really
want that. Uh of course, your torso is
going to tip forward a little bit, but
that's not the objective. You allow it
to happen, but you don't force it to
happen. So, looking straight ahead
allows you to be in a very balanced
position for heavy squats. However, in
my experience when I'm working with
beginners, teaching them how to teaching
them to look forward. Um, it's basically
so looking up is is in the neck. That's
called cervical extension. So that's the
cervical spine. So cervical extension is
also paired with lumbar extension. So
when people look up, it forces their
tails to arch. Now that's not the
correct brace for a squat. The correct
brace for a squat is neutral hips. So
neutral pelvis. So I find that when I'm
teaching people nowadays how to maintain
a good brace looking straight ahead can
make it very difficult to understand not
to do this. So they go like this. They
arch their tail and then they go into
buttwink in the bottom position because
you lose range of motion in hip joint
flexion when you anterly rotate your
pelvis. in addition to anterior rotation
of pelvis lengthens the six-pack muscles
which is the rectus abdominis. So
therefore that's not how you brace those
muscles. The way you brace those muscles
is to instead of lengthening it
shortening it. So if you were to be
punched in the belly do you want to be
here? No. That's not very strong. You
want to be that's a strong brace. So
arching your tail is is you know reduced
range of motion and reduced core
strength. So therefore, I'm finding a
lot of success transitioning the way
that I teach people the cues of eye
position. So nowadays, I'm having a lot
of great success teaching people to look
down as they begin. And some and it
depends on the individual. Some people
I'm telling them to look all the way
down so that they can allow for some
forward torso lean. You need some
forward torso lean. So if you arch your
tail too much because you're looking
straight ahead, try that. Try and look
down, right? And therefore the arch or
the hinge is is a hip hinge rather than
a anterior tilt. So the you don't want
that to happen in a squat. You want
brace and then a hip hinge. And that's
going to allow for a much stronger brace
and much more range of motion. So that's
the transition. If you fail your squats,
if you fail to achieve the great
position in your squats because you're
in anterior tilt and you're looking up,
try that. Try and look down. Look down.
Brace the abs. Like imagine you're going
to get punched in the belly. So that
means bring your rib cage towards the
pelvis. That's how you contract your
rectus abdominis.
Look down and hinge at the hips rather
than anterly rotating your pelvis.
Now watch me. Well, and then here's the
next thing. So as you get more and more
advanced, you learn how to separate
those two. So looking up for me, I'm
able to extend my thoracic spine without
extending my lumbar spine. So that's as
you get more and more advanced, you
learn to look up without having to do
that. So I that's what I actually do.
I'm looking straight ahead, but then I
brace my core this way. So I still have
the best of both worlds. I've got the
proprioception component, so the balance
component looking straight ahead so that
I can balance a heavy barbell on my
back. But I also know how to correctly
brace my core.
Let's show those cues in action.
Okay. So, this is me arching my tail.
Don't do that. Bang. Okay. So, that's
neutral pelvis and I'm looking straight
ahead.
Okay. another way of looking down.
That feels strange for me because it's
unfamiliar, but for some people that
might be the exact cue that you need to
make sure that you've got a strong brace
for a squat.
Last warm up set. Um, I'm going to get
my recorder out.
no pain.
Um, if you have a look at my my injury,
uh, Musty, my videographer just said to
me, I was a really good bale the way
that I dumped the bar. And I thought, I
don't really put much thought into it,
but in my early days of working towards
being as strong as possible, one of the
squat programs that I followed with
great success was the squat everyday
program. Um, that was kind of like
inspired by um, a weightlifting coach by
the name of John Bros. and he
popularized a squat everyday program
based off the Bulgarian method which is
weightlifting method where they max out
every day and they train every single
day pure specificity. So the idea was to
max out with your squats every day. So
work up to a top set and do back down
work. And I used to train 13 sessions
per week. So that's twice a day every
day except for one on Sunday. And it's
not because you need the rest, it's
because you need a life. So it gave me
Sunday afternoons off and I thought yeah
I'll do what it takes. I want to be
really really good. Anyhow, that took me
from 180 kg squat to 230 kg squat in a
very short time period. Um, so does it
work? Yeah, it did. But then when I
continued past that, I don't want to say
it just doesn't work and steer clear
from it or or anything like that. This
is just my experience. Um, maybe I
wasn't doing it properly. But yeah, from
230 I plateaued and I stayed there for a
long time, squatting every day for a
long time. And when you squat every day,
it's not just squat every day, but it's
also max out every day. And when I did
that, I knew how to dump the bar. So,
um, for me, that's also why I squat from
these racks like this. I don't care if I
if I fail. I know how to bail out. Uh,
it's pretty easy for me. Um, so that's
the next thing. I don't I used to teach
people um on our first squat sessions
how to how to bail on a squat if you
need to. Um, and that was me in my early
days. And I thought when I look back at
that, I got to the point where it's
like, no, you shouldn't be failing. you
shouldn't be taking these squats,
especially when you're learning. You
shouldn't be taking these squats that
close to fail. Don't learn to fail. And
I was teaching people how to fail. And
they wouldn't even try. They got to a
point where it's like, uh, no, dump the
bar. So that's why I thought, I'm going
to stop that method. I'm going to stop
teaching people how to fail. Teach them
how to succeed instead, right? Um, so
that's why it's like, should you learn
how to dump the bar? Of course, because
it's good to know how to do that. But at
the same time, that shouldn't be your
plan for a squat session. If I write a
program for somebody and I write a
number down, it's not because I think
maybe you'll fail it and you might have
to bail or whatever. It's because that's
the number that I expect you to get. And
I don't plan I don't program for anyone
a weight that I think that they're going
to fail on. And I teach people to try
and avoid that. Uh anyhow, so that was
the program. That's the squat everyday
program. And that's my experience. I got
to the point where I got to 230 kg from
from 180 in a very short time. U and I
think that yeah, it was definitely a
very effective program. However, uh that
was the negative. It caused a lot of
pain. So, I was in constant pain. Um and
I also got squat injuries from that that
made me realize that wasn't the best
plan for me at that point. My technique
also sucked. So, that's why I'm not
saying the squat everyday program
doesn't work. It's bad. I'm saying the
way that I did it at that time of my
career, it was bad. And that's probably
one of the biggest contributors. My
technique really, really sucked. But
either way, I haven't revisited that and
I've been able to get a lot of great
success without squatting with that much
frequency. So my thought process now is
the stronger you get, the the lower the
frequency should be. So now my level of
strength, I squatted 300 kg with sleeves
uh not long ago before my tear of course
and I believe that with that level of
strength, I need more recovery between
sessions. So for me, having one heavy
spine loading session per week was the
smartest way to progress. And I did that
for the last, you know, five 10 years of
my career since working with Eric
Liybridge and Ernie Liybridge. Um, and
that worked very very well for me as
well as coaching some of the strongest
athletes in the world, including Thor
Bjönson. So when I first started working
with Thor, he had a 450 kg deadlift. And
of course, we worked to 501 kg using the
same principle, which is one heavy spine
loading session per week. So spine
loading exercises are squats as well as
deadlifts. So, a lot of the times when
we're doing our deadlift phases, it's
heavy deadlifts and light squats and
then and then if you're doing squats and
deadlifts at the same time, you flip
that. So, that's the lily bridge method.
They squat and deadlifts on the same
day. And if they max out on their
squats, then they do accessory deadlifts
with a very light weight. And then they
flip that the next week. So, they go max
out on their deadlifts and then heavy
squats that are very lightweight. And
they continue to alternate between
squat, deadlift, squat, deadlift
forever. And that's how they achieve
great success. Now, do I think that's a
great program? Damn straight it is. The
proof is in the numbers that they're
getting. They are world record holders.
They're the best in the world. So, you
can't deny that it works. However, uh
the context is it works at that level.
They are so damn strong that squatting
or loading the spine more frequently
than that. They're not able to recover
from. But most people in my experience
aren't that strong. So, if you're a
beginner or intermediate, you're not
loading even double body weight squats.
uh you know like for me 300 kg which I
can do is triple body weightight squat
and same with deadlifts I can do triple
body weightight deadlift and some people
a lot more. So if you know at that level
you need more time to recover but in
your beginner days maybe not. So this is
why a lot of people they look at the
they look up to their favorite lifters
and their favorite programs and they say
ah that works for this level so that's
what I'm going to do. You're not at that
level. So instead of looking at what
your favorite athlete does and training
like that, don't look at what they're
doing now. Look at what they did to get
to where they are because you're in a
very different part to your journey than
what they are on their journey. All
right, work set number one, 150 kg, five
reps.
Good one.
So, I feel it. Very, very small amount.
Um, but way less than what I did last
week with 150 with 140. So, what's my
plan? Uh, I'm just going to keep it
here. 150. Three sets of five. Set one
is done.
That felt even less in the first set.
That felt like literally nothing on my
quad,
which is fine.
I'll keep it there. So sometimes I get
carried away and I go, "Oh, it felt
good, so I'm going to go heavier." Um,
and that's a good strategy as well. But
for today,
um, the focus is a heavy deadlift.
So, one more set, you know, 150 kg for
three sets of five is still good. I'm
squatting two times per week. Uh, and if
I keep on adding 10 kg per week, in 10
weeks time, that'll be 250 for five,
which is pretty good. and then 20 weeks
time that'll be 350 for five. But of
course it doesn't work that way. Do you
know what I'm saying? So a lot of the
times that's how you got to think about
it in the long game. Going up by 10 kg
per session is huge even if you start at
a very low number. And a lot of people
get impatient. They say no I want it
now. Uh and I can do more. So let's do
more. Sometimes it's good to have that
hunger, but I'm looking at the long game
and I know that I'll get back to if I do
it slowly slowly with no pain. I'm not
missing out because as I said, this is
giving me time to focus on my deadlift.
And if I can come back to my heavy
squats and have my deadlift at a high
number, uh, it's going to be a huge
advantage. So either way, I'm happy. 150
2x5 done, one set to go.
What can we say about the technique?
It's pretty good. As expected, it's
pretty light, but I'm doing all the
right things. Hitting depth. That's the
biggest thing is making sure on all of
these light weights that the the
standard for the depth is good. So
sometimes you get carried away and go
heavier and heavier and go shallower and
shallower with your squat depth
no good crease of the hip. So in
powerlifting crease of the hip needs to
be
hopefully that's it crease of the hip
needs to be below the top of the knee.
So if it's above that which a lot of
people do that's shallow. Parallel is
also shallow. You can't be parallel.
You've got to be below parallel. I'm
giving myself 5 minutes rest between
sets.
Very comfortable day.
Next up,
pause deficit deadlifts from a deficit.
You have to warm back up to that one.
Yeah. So, I do feel sets. I don't need
to warm up. So, I'm warm, but I do need
to
go through the movements again. So, I
don't need a warm up like how I just
did. I'll be taking big jumps. So, I'll
probably just do cuz it's going to be um
five red plates. It's 270. So I'll start
at one red plate and then take 50 kilo
jumps. So that's 70 kg is one red plate
and then 70 120 170 220 and then we go.
So I'll do four four field sets and then
I'll do one top set of two on 270.
[Music]
[Applause]
Come on.
Damn it.
Too heavy today.
Too heavy today. Too much on my mind.
That whole thing of stopping and
realigning and all that stuff was no
good. Um
sometimes it's just not there. I do feel
like I was strong enough to do it, but
it was just not there today.
It's this that I need to be speaking
into. Uh anyway, I'm just going to do
some light back down accessories. Uh but
that's my session. Unfortunately, I
don't have a big post a big set to post
today. All right, I'm out. See you guys.